
Given observed polarized sources, there are three programs that fit the
data to provide the Mueller matrix elements:

1. mmfit_2016.pro

Given a single polarized source observed over a range of parallactic
angles, this least squares fits the data to provide the Mueller matrix
parameters. This is our classic fitting procedure, modified to allow
nonzero Stokes V. It is intended for the very common case where you have
well-sampled parallactic angle covereage of a single polarization
calibration standard source.

The input data consist of the PA dependences of each of the 3 observed
fractional Stokes parameters, which are expressed by 3 parameters for
each observed stokes parameter:

(AMB, AB, BA) = A + B cos(2PA) + C

The coefficients A, B, and C are fitted to the observed fractional
stokes parameters by STRIPFIT_TO_PACOEFFS. Thus, there are 9 input
numbers (3 sets of ABC, one for each of the three fractional Stokes
parameters).

There are up to 8 parameters to fit:

	    5 Mueller matrix parameters (chi is not fit for. It should
	    be set to 90 degrees)
	    3 source Stokes parameters (Q, U, V)

You can choose any combination of the 8 parameters to fit. For example,
if you know the source Stokes parameters, you specify that they not be
fit. Because the number of fitting parameters can be as high as 8, and
there are only 9 inputs, the more parameters you can fix, the better.

In fact, if you fit for all 8 parameters, there is only 1 degree of
freedom, and the degeneracies (covariances) are so strong that under no
circumstances can you actually fit all 8 parameters. So you have to
eliminate fitting for one or more parameters. In our classic fits, we
forced the Stokes V parameter to equal zero, because our calibration
sources were classic continuum sources with very little V. Now, however,
we might want to use OH masers, which can have strong Stokes V. 

With nonzero V, you must eliminate other parameters from the fit. The
most important Muellar matrix parameters are deltag and psi, and you
always need to solve for them.  Because a reasonably well-engineered
feed will have small imperfections, the parameters that express these
imperfections can be eliminated from the fit. These parameters are
epsilon and its associated phase angle phi; and alpha and its associated
angle chi. Almost always, epsilon is the least important parameter
because it is the smallest. For any native polarization you can set
epsilon equal to zero and its angle to anything and not solve for
them. This should be enough to obtain a good fit. You can reduce
covariance problems further by fixing alpha: for native dual linear you
set alpha=0 and chi=90 deg; for dual circular, alpha=45 degrees and
chi=90 degrees. The program never allows a fit for chi, and chi should
always be set to 90 degrees.



2.  mmfit_2016_multiplesources.pro

This is like mmfit_2016.pro, but treats the case when you have
observations of more than one source and want to derive Mueller matrix
parameters by including the data from all those sources. You can also
obtain the Stokes parameters for all, or any combination of, the
sources.

The most important use for this is when you have well-sampled PA
coverage of a polarized OH maser, e.g. W49, for which you can regard
each spectral channel as an independent source. The program then
provides the 3 Stokes parameter spectra.  For each source (or spectral
channel), the input data consist of the PA dependence of each of the 3
observed fractional Stokes parameters, which is expressed by 3
parameters for each observed stokes parameter--a total of 9 data points
for each source. The total number of input datapoints is then 9N_src.

If you don't know the source polarizations, then you are fitting for 5
Mueller matrix elements plus 3 Stokes parameters per source. The total
number of fittig parameters is 5 + 3N_src. So the number of degrees of
freedom is the difference between these two numbers, which is
6N_src-5. So having only just two sources instead of one has a big effect
because it changes the number of degrees of freedom from 1 to
7. Nevertheless, if the feed is good you still might want to not fit for
epsilon and phi, and also alpha.

A caution for large N_src (e.g., hundreds or thousands of channels in a
single spectrum): The number of parameters being solved for is 5 +
3N_src. Suppose N_src = 1000, i.e. you have a three 1000-channel spectra
(one for each fractional Stokes parameter)--so 3N_src=3000. The
covariance matrix is then a 3005 x 3005 matrix, and the program has to
evaluate its inverse. The computer time required goes as (3N_src +
5)^3. CUBED! When N_src exceeds a few hundred, the time can become
excessive. You can deal with this in a two-step fashion: step 1, rebin
the spectra so that you have fewer channels, and do the fit at lower
spectral resolution; step 2, apply the derived mueller matrix to the
spectra with full resolution.


The above comments about (1) above apply here equally well.

3. mparamsfit.pro

This program determines Mueller matrix parameters when you have
observations of 2 or more sources and little or no parallactic angle
coverage. You have to know the polarizations of the observed
sources. For example, if you have observations of several continuum
polarization standard calibrators, each at 1 or more parallactic angles,
this will provide the Mueller matrix parameters. But it cannot provide
the source stokes parameters; you have to know them.

The FAST and Galt telescopes need this program because of their limited
or zero coverage in parallactic angle. The sources can be continuum
polarization calibrators or a known OH maser spectrum; the latter is
especially convenient because you don't have to do position switching.

For each observed source, the input data are its 3 observed fractional
polarized Stokes parameters, so the number of input datapoints is
3N_src. There are five Mueller matrix to solve for, so with 2 sources
there is 1 degree of freedom (but see paragraphs below). As in (1)
above, this isn't enough, so you need to exclude epsilon and phi, and
maybe also alpha, from the fit.  The more sources, the better; the fewer
parameters to solve for, the better.

4. Complications in real life: discussion for a native dual-linear
feed. 

4.1. The mounting angle of the feed.

Consider a native dual-linear feed. We fit the 'observed Stokes
parameters', which are XX+YY, XX-YY, XY, YX, to their variation with
parallactic angle theta_par. (Here XX is the X self-product, etc.)
Question: just exactly what do we mean by this parallactic angle
theta_par?  Answer: it's the parallactic angle of the feed probe that we
are calling X. This is easy to see: The observed Stokes parameter
Q_obs=XX-YY. For a source whose polarization position angle is 0 deg
(i.e., its polarization is north-south with no east-west component),
Q_obs is maximized when the X probe is north-south, i.e. when the X
probe's parallactic angle is zero.

The relationship between the source's parallactic angle and the X
probe's parallactic angle depends on how the feed is mechanically
mounted on the telescope. Consider the telescope being pointed towards
zenith. In this case, the parallactic angle equals the azimuth angle +
180 degrees. For polarization, this 180 degrees might as well be zero
degrees because polarization is concerned with orientation, not
direction, so for now we will forget about the 180 degrees and consider
the two angles to be equal. Place yourself at the feed looking down at
the ground. You see azimuth increase clockwise; parallactic angle also
increases clockwise. If the X probe is aligned north-south, then both
its azimuth and its parallactic angle are zero. If the X probe is
rotated clockwise by some angle theta_feed, then both its azimuth and its
parallactic angle equal theta_feed.

Now consider the telescope being pointed towards some source.  Define a
new spherical coordinate system whose pole is the direction of the
source; call this the z axis. The two linear probes are two orthogonal
lines that define a plane. This plane is perpendicular to the line of
sight to the source, so we can call this the x-y axes of the new
coordinate system. In this new system, the relatiionships among the
telescope, feed, and sky are identical in spirit to the telescope
pointing towards the zenith in the terrestrial alt-az system, with the
exception that for theta_feed=0 the parallactic angle of the x-probe is
equal to the parallactic angle of the source parang_src. So, generally,
we can write

        parang_Xprobe= parang_src + theta_feed

In our least square fits for the parallactic angle dependence of the
observed Stokes parameters, we should be using parang_xprobe as the
independent variable. 

4.2. The effects of interchanged cables.

A native dual-linear feed and receiver system presents two cables to the
digital backend. Suppose they are labelled at the ends, where they plug
into the backend, and these labels say X_cable and Y_cable. Suppose
further that at the feed we have probe X_probe, as above, and probe
Y_probe. In real life the labeling can be interchanged. This can happen
for the initial installation, and also during maintenance and repair.

Similarly, the backend has four outputs: time (t) integrated values of
XX, YY, XY, and YX. For a correlator, the crosscorrelation product
XY(tau)=<X(t)Y(t+tau)> and YX(tau)=<X(t+tau)Y(t)>, where the <> indicate
time averages. For a Fourier backend, we also have four outputs, two
auto and two cross product. In practice, the communication between the
astronomer and the engineer may not be perfect, and when commissioning
a new backend one cannot know for sure that XY and YX are not
interchanged. 

If cables or cross-products are interchanged, the derived Mueller matrix
coefficients and also the source Stokes parameters are affected. In
particular, it can change the 'handedness' of the position angle of
linear polarization. We used our fitting programs to investigate these
effects, which we show in the table below.  'X<->Y' means X_cable is
conneced to Y_probe and vice-versa, so that XX-YY changes sign and XY,YX
are interchanged; 'XY<->YX' means the backend cross-product outputs are
reversed but the X and Y cable labels are correct.

	X<->Y	                  XY<->YX	     X<->Y
DeltaG_{X<->Y}=-DeltaG	DeltaG_{XY<->YX}=DeltaG		

psi_{X<->Y}=-(psi + 90)       psi_{XY<->YX}=-(psi + 90)

alpha_{X<->Y}=-alpha          alpha_{XY<->YX}=(alpha + 90)

epsilon_{X<->Y}=epsilon       ----

phi{X<->Y}=phi + 180	      ----

Q_src{X<->Y}=-Qsrc          Q_src{XY<->YX}=-Qsrc

U_src{X<->Y}=-Usrc          U_src{XY<->YX}=-Usrc

V_src{X<->Y}=Vsrc           V_src{XY<->YX}=-Vsrc

pasrc{X<->Y}=(pasrc + 90)   pasrc{XY<->YX}=(pasrc + 90)




pasr
cond    DeltaG  psi     alpha   epsilon  phi    Qsrc   Usrc   Vsrc    pasrc

OKsrc0  .0450   .9250   .0500   -.0050   1.726  .0200  -.0300 -.0400  -28.155
                                                .0220  -.0300  .0400  -26.873
                                                .0180  -.0300 -.400   -29.518

both    -.0450  -2.4958  -.0500  .0050   1.726  -.0200  .0300 -.0400   61.845
                                                -.0220  .0300  .0400   63.127
                                                -.0180  .0300 -.400    60.481

xx<->yy -.0450   .9250   -.0500   ----   ---    0      0      -.0400   ----
                                                0      0      .0400    ----
                                                0      0      -.400

 

XY<->YX  .0450 -2.4958  1.6208   6e-6  7.8540 -.0200   .0300  .0400   61.845
                                               -.0220   .0300 -.0400   63.127
                                               -.0180   .0300  .400    60.482


both



What are
the effects on our calibration?

